---
title: "Preliminary Analysis of Veteran Disability"
author: "Amanda Fredrickson"
Github ID: mandyfreddy
---
Research Question

  This inquiry delves into the intricate dynamics of disability payments to U.S. veterans, analyzing the rationale behind these disbursements, their influence on veterans' earnings and labor market engagement, and the subsequent effects on government expenditure and societal views of veterans. Notably, in fiscal year 2022, disability payments for 5.3 million veterans amounted to 125 billion dollars — a substantial segment of the federal budget for veterans, even exceeding their healthcare costs. The total budget for the Veterans Administration in FY22 was 269.9 billion dollars, of which this mandatory disability spending composes a significant portion. Of the approximately 16 million living veterans in the United States., approximately one-third receive a monthly disability payment, averaging 20,000 dollars paid annually per recipient. These payments are intended, by federal law passed in 1945, to compensate for the anticipated loss of earnings due to service-related health conditions experienced during a military term, with amounts varying based on the severity of disabilities. Compensated conditions range from hearing loss and anxiety at the minor end, to loss of limb or life-altering post-traumatic stress at the major end; and a person is assigned a rating from 0 to 100 percent in increments of ten to represent their conditions and corresponding payment. A service member, when exiting the service, goes through a medical claims process where they are evaluated and assigned ratings by VA and medical personnel, which they can appeal later if they wish or reject entirely. The lowest end, ten percent, is a payment of 171.23 per month, and the highest end, 100 percent, is a payment of 3,737.85 which increases based on the number of dependents (spouse and/or children). This is completely tax-free, indexed to inflation, and typically received for life without stipulations or work requirements. My initial analysis here seeks to dissect a preliminary correlation between disability ratings and economic outcomes for veterans. I would like to not debate the legitimacy of these payments fundamentally, as there are certainly deserving military personnel for whom these payments are a lifeline. However, I would like to address a nuanced perspective of questioning the pervasiveness and ease of these disability payments as the military transitions into peacetime; and especially to question a cultural landscape among service members that often valorizes the maximization of benefits, since you "earned it", which could undermine the fiscal integrity of the Veterans Administration and societal principles.

  The Congressional Budget Office's 2023 report, which proposed means-testing benefits for households earning above 170,000 dollars, faced vehement opposition — a testament to the entrenched belief in entitlement to these benefits post-military service without restrictions. This measure could save the VA 33 billion dollars per year, a reduction of 19 percent and arguably right-sizing who truly needs benefits to offset earnings loss from their service-connected conditions. This report sets the stage for a broader evaluation of disability payments, particularly in light of the 60,000 military personnel wounded in total in two decades of conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan, contrasted with the around 250,000 people added per year who newly require VA disability benefits. Such data spotlight the fact that numerous veterans' payments are for non-combat-related health issues, and might in fact be for lifestyle and age progressive conditions that the military did not cause, but was rather simply present for the onset of and would have occurred if the individual was in a different profession. This raises the ethical question of the extent to which taxpayers should compensate veterans for conditions not directly caused by military service. My objective was to independently assess the impact of disability payments on income and labor force participation (LFP) among veterans compared to non-veterans, both nationally, and at the state level. I was interested in a state-level exploration, as I have often encountered differing attitudes about the intrinsic or extrinsic reasons for signing up to be in the military depending on where an individual is from - although that is very anecdotal, there are certainly trends in where service members tend to be from. The Congressional Budget Office's findings from December 2023 served as a basis for this exploration, revealing disparities in earnings among veterans with different disability ratings. Veterans with a rating of 10 percent or 20 percent earned about the same as similar veterans with no rating; veterans with a rating of 30 percent to 60 percent earned slightly less; and veterans with a rating of 70 percent or more earned much less. This project aimed to extend the analysis to include non-veteran outcomes and state-by-state comparisons, seeking to understand the broader implications of disability payments on labor market dynamics.

Approach

  The project's methodological framework involved a comprehensive analysis of demographic, income, labor participation, and disability data for veterans, utilizing the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) from the American Community Survey (ACS) for 2011 and 2016; and the IPUMS Current Population Survey (CPS) Veterans Supplement for 2021 and 2022. Contrary to my initial expectations, the ACS provided more granular data, including specific service-connected disability ratings. I had thought from my initial research that the Veterans Supplement would be more comprehensive, but was pleasantly surprised by the data already included in the ACS. Additionally, I conducted a sentiment analysis on the public discourse surrounding means-testing veteran disability payments by web scraping the top five non-press release Google search results for "CBO means test VA disability". Data preparation challenges were navigated successfully, leading to an initial exploratory analysis focused on labor force participation and income stratified by age and veteran status, with an expanded view incorporating disability ratings. The data was cleaned, and variables were created that better illuminated certain trends, especially for the plots to show the comparisons and trends I was interested in. 

Discussion

  The first notable trend is the inverse relationship between labor force participation and disability ratings among veterans. As disability ratings increase, particularly among older veterans, there is a marked decrease in labor force participation. This correlation suggests that higher disability ratings, which are indicative of more severe health conditions, may act as a barrier to employment, which is concurrent with the purpose of disability benefits to make up for lost work. This pattern underscores the potential need for targeted employment support programs for veterans with higher disability ratings, as well as the necessity for policies that accommodate the unique challenges faced by disabled veterans in the workforce.

   Continuing to compare labor force participation between veterans and non-veterans yielded surprising insights, with veterans generally showing higher participation rates across most younger age groups; as long as the disability rating was low enough. This could reflect a culture of work ethic and discipline instilled during military service, translating into higher labor engagement post-service. My anecdotal hypothesis is that there is more intrinsic drive to find meaning outside of the military if an individual is not told a percentage of how much they are disabled; and then paid accordingly as if they are "broken" if they are truly not and capable of working. However, the exception to this trend in the senior age category suggests that as veterans age, factors such as health conditions or the sufficiency of disability payments might lead them to exit the workforce earlier than non-veterans with less aggravated health conditions. The geographic analysis conducted through this research highlighted the economic realities of veterans across the United States. While, on average, veterans tend to earn less than their non-veteran counterparts, certain states show deviations from this pattern and in fact an complete reversal. For instance, veterans in southern and mid-Atlantic states, such as Texas and Virginia, demonstrate higher earnings for veterans than non-veterans. These variances raise critical questions about the impact of state-level policies, such as tax incentives or specialized veterans' services, on these economic outcomes. Moreover, they prompt further inquiry into the demographic and economic characteristics of each state's veteran population, such as the prevalence of service-connected disabilities or the availability of local support networks.

  The brief regression analysis quantified the impact of veteran status on household income. The model identified a modest decrease in income associated with veteran status, in particular household income. This finding, while statistically significant, also indicates that veteran status alone is not a predominant factor in economic outcomes, and other variables are probably more explanatory, like state, or disability rating, or something else that is a more powerful predictor. I would have to do further data reshaping to tease this out in future research. Another model could incorporate things beyond my analysis, possibly including education level, nature of service-connected disabilities, and regional economic conditions. These might play a more substantial role in determining veterans' financial situations. The sentiment analysis on the discourse surrounding the means-testing of veteran disability payments revealed a predominantly positive sentiment, surprisingly, although pockets of strong negativity were detected, particularly within specific advocacy groups. This bifurcation of opinion reflects a broader societal debate on the nature of entitlement and the appropriate compensation for military service. I think I would have found more broadly negative sentiment if I was able to scrape memes, social media comments, and more, as the discourse was very derisive around this proposal despite the lack of impact to most commenters. The vehement opposition to the proposal for means testing, despite its high income threshold, signifies a deeply rooted belief in the non-negotiable value of veterans' sacrifices and the corresponding benefits, at any cost and without any debate. 

  The insights derived from this research have significant implications for public policy and societal perceptions of veterans. The debate over disability payments is not merely a financial one but is also emblematic of the values and recognition afforded to those who have served in the military. Benefits are certainly deserved, but not carte blanche and not without debate. Right now, the status quo is to pay veterans for being sick, not to pay them to be healthy. This creates perverse incentives for some who are exploiting the system, which I have heard discussed as if it's the norm ("Hey, I hear sleep apnea gets you 20 percent, so here's how to get your doctor to diagnose you with it!"). As such, this research contributes to a larger conversation about how veterans are reintegrated into civilian life, the adequacy of support systems in place, and the extent to which society upholds its commitments to its service members.

Conclusion and Future Research

  This preliminary analysis underscores the need for an ongoing critical examination of the premises underpinning veteran disability payments, especially given the substantial financial investment involved. Findings indicate that while these payments serve a vital function in supporting veterans with service-connected disabilities, the system may benefit from a more tailored approach that accounts for the diverse economic repercussions of different disability levels. The cultural norm and encouragement of benefit maximization also merits further scrutiny, particularly regarding its implications for veterans' self-perception and societal views on entitlement. The research suggests variability in how veterans utilize these payments, and whether these benefits truly make up for potentially lost income, which could influence their participation in the labor force. Further investigations should delve deeper into the economic distinctions among veterans, considering the effects of disabilities and state-level influences. Continuing this dialogue is crucial for ensuring the support extended to veterans is equitable and efficacious, honoring their service while responsibly managing public funds.

References

- https://www.cbo.gov/budget-options/58631 
- https://hunterseven.org/vacuts/
- https://federalnewsnetwork.com/veterans-affairs/2021/10/a-veteran-turned-professor-says-the-system-for-care-of-the-nations-veterans-is-broken/
- https://cck-law.com/veterans-law/how-much-do-veterans-get-for-disability/
- https://www.va.gov/disability/compensation-rates/veteran-rates/